FR #982: Update Billed and Effective Cost Normative Requirements (#1966)
FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS_Spec: specification/datasets/cost_and_usage/columns/effectivecost.md

Author: Let's think hard about how to account for this within the normative requirements, as strictly definitional guidance isn't enforceable.

Reviewer: Latest requirements address this concern. Resolving.

# Effective Cost

> Effective Cost represents the cost of a [*charge*](#glossary:charge) based on the [*resources*](#glossary:resource) used, [*services*](#glossary:service) used, or [*contract commitments*](#glossary:contract-commitment) recognized in a given [*charge period*](#glossary:charge-period). Effective Cost differs from [Billed Cost](#datasets.costandusage.billedcost) when *charges* (both prepaid and postpaid) are invoiced separately from usage.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Effective Cost represents the cost of a [*charge*](#glossary:charge) based on the [*resources*](#glossary:resource) used, [*services*](#glossary:service) used, or [*contract commitments*](#glossary:contract-commitment) recognized in a given [*charge period*](#glossary:charge-period). Effective Cost differs from [Billed Cost](#datasets.costandusage.billedcost) when *[*covering charges*](#glossary:covering-charge) (e.g., commitment purchases) are invoiced separately from the [*covered charges*](#glossary:covered-charge) they apply to.
```

Reviewer 3: Same convo as we have for BilledCost
https://github.com/FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS_Spec/pull/1966/changes#r3018708236

Author: Mirrored the BilledCost preamble change here. Same combined resolution: covered/covering terminology with "recorded separately." Kept "prepaid or postpaid" in both preambles for symmetry. See the BilledCost thread for the full rationale.

Effective Cost represents the cost of a [*charge*](#glossary:charge) based on the [*resources*](#glossary:resource) used, [*services*](#glossary:service) used, or [*contract commitments*](#glossary:contract-commitment) recognized in a given [*charge period*](#glossary:charge-period). Effective Cost differs from [Billed Cost](#datasets.costandusage.billedcost) when *charges* (both pre-paid and post-paid) are invoiced separately from usage.

> For all *charges*, Effective Cost reflects all applicable pricing adjustments (e.g., reduced pricing from [*negotiated discounts*](#glossary:negotiated-discount) or [*commitment discounts*](#glossary:commitment-discount)). For usage *charges*, Effective Cost includes the recognized portion of *Billed Cost* from related purchase *charges* (e.g., amortized portions of prepayments, drawdowns). For purchase *charges*, Effective Cost excludes any amounts recognized in related usage *charges* (e.g., usage [*covered*](#glossary:covered-charge) by [*covering charges*](#glossary:covering-charge) such as *commitments*, pre-payments, or marketplace purchases which draw down based on usage), regardless of when those related *charges* are invoiced.

Reviewer 4: Are we using `prepayment` or `pre-payment`?  Not consistent, either in this paragraph, or throughout this PR.  Recommend `prepayment`.

Author: Fixed in 3e2fd207. Standardized to "prepayment"/"prepaid" (no hyphens) across both billedcost.md and effectivecost.md preambles.

> For all *charges*, Effective Cost reflects all applicable pricing adjustments (e.g., reduced pricing from [*negotiated discounts*](#glossary:negotiated-discount) or [*commitment discounts*](#glossary:commitment-discount)). For usage *charges*, Effective Cost includes the recognized portion of *Billed Cost* from related purchase *charges* (e.g., amortized portions of prepayments, drawdowns). For purchase *charges*, Effective Cost excludes any amounts recognized in related usage *charges* (e.g., usage [*covered*](#glossary:covered-charge) by [*covering charges*](#glossary:covering-charge) such as *commitments*, pre-payments, or marketplace purchases which draw down based on usage), regardless of when those related *charges* are invoiced.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For all charges, Effective Cost reflects the actual economic cost of a charge including all applicable pricing adjustments (e.g., reduced pricing from [*negotiated discounts*](#glossary:negotiated-discount) or [*commitment discounts*](#glossary:commitment-discount)). For usage charges, Effective Cost includes the recognized portion of Billed Cost from related [*covering*](#glossary:covering-charge) purchase charges (e.g., amortized portions of prepayments, drawdowns). For purchase charges, Effective Cost reflects only the portion of cost that has not been redistributed to related usage charges — specifically, excluding any amounts amortized to related [*covered*](#glossary:covered-charge) usage charges (e.g., commitments, prepayments, or drawdown-based marketplace purchases), regardless of when those charges are invoiced. Where the full purchase amount is redistributed as amortized cost to covered usage charges, Effective Cost for the purchase charge will be 0.
```

I feel like this better explains the effective cost, the current suggestion while more aligned to how billed cost is has an issue that could potentially lead to excluding purchases, such as commitments paid monthly, the way it currently reads could mean that if a purchase charge is a commitment it must be 0 in effective cost, but for paid monthly commitments, it is both a usage row and purchase row in effective cost.

Author: Thanks for the detailed rewrite, @thecloudman. Keeping the current preamble structure for now — it mirrors the billedcost.md preamble pattern, which helps readers compare the two columns side by side.

Your underlying concern about monthly commitment clarity is valid and I'm addressing it in the adjacent thread on line 20.

* EffectiveCost MUST be of type Decimal.
* EffectiveCost MUST conform to [NumericFormat](#attributes.numericformat) requirements.
* EffectiveCost MUST NOT be null.

> * EffectiveCost MUST be a valid decimal value.

Reviewer 5: PR #2047 removed this type of redundant requirement as it is cover by lines 13 and 14 above.
"EffectiveCost MUST be a valid decimal value."

Author: Good catch, thanks. Removed in ceee17fe. These were re-introduced during the merge conflict resolution on Mar 30 (the conflicts landed on the same lines #2047 deleted). Also caught the same line in CostAndUsage.BilledCost, which wasn't flagged but had the same issue. All five files cleaned up.

* EffectiveCost MUST conform to [NumericFormat](#attributes.numericformat) requirements.
* EffectiveCost MUST NOT be null.
* EffectiveCost MUST be a valid decimal value.
* EffectiveCost MUST be denominated in the BillingCurrency.

> * EffectiveCost MUST reflect all applicable pricing adjustments, including but not limited to *negotiated discounts*, *commitment discounts*, and other applicable discount programs.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
* EffectiveCost MUST reflect all applicable pricing adjustments, including but not limited to *negotiated discounts*, *commitment discounts*, and other applicable discount programs.
* EffectiveCost MUST include portions of covering *charges* applied to this *charge*.
```

Reviewer: 1. covered or covering?
2. should we also add a corresponding BilledCost requirement?

Reviewer: Alternative agreed during TF-3 meeting (Feb 27).

```suggestion
* EffectiveCost MUST reflect all applicable pricing adjustments, including but not limited to *negotiated discounts*, *commitment discounts*, and other applicable discount programs.
* EffectiveCost MUST include any portion of covering purchase *charges'* BilledCost applied to this *charge*.
```

Reviewer 6: I meant to say if a portion of a covering charge (e.g. purchase) is applied to this change (the covered charge), that needs to be included.

Reviewer 6: For the BilledCost portion, do you see it as:

`* BilledCost MUST NOT include the portions covered by other *charges*.`

I think it's already captured by saying this should only reflect the amount being invoiced, but if needed, we can add this.

Author: Addressing the two questions from this thread:

1. **Covered or covering?** — "Covering" is correct per Udam's clarification. The requirement describes what happens to the *covered* charge's EffectiveCost (it must include the applied portion from the *covering* purchase charge). Irena's rewording in 01d5c09 makes this clearer.

2. **Corresponding BilledCost requirement?** — Already captured by line 19: "BilledCost MUST NOT include any portion covered by related purchase charges." That's the inverse of this EffectiveCost requirement. No additional BilledCost requirement needed.

Resolving in favor of the wording committed in 01d5c09.

> * EffectiveCost MUST equal BilledCost when ChargeCategory is "Usage" and the *charge* is not covered by other eligible *charges*.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
* EffectiveCost MUST equal BilledCost when [ChargeCategory](#datasets.costandusage.chargecategory) is "Usage" and the *charge* is not covered by other eligible *charges*.
```

* EffectiveCost MUST equal BilledCost when ChargeCategory is "Purchase" and the *charge* is neither intended to cover other eligible *charges* nor covered by other eligible *charges*.
* EffectiveCost MUST equal BilledCost when ChargeCategory is "Tax" or "Credit".
* EffectiveCost MAY differ from BilledCost when ChargeCategory is "Adjustment".

> * EffectiveCost MUST be 0 when [ChargeCategory](#datasets.costandusage.chargecategory) is "Purchase" and the purchase is intended to cover related eligible *charges*.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
* EffectiveCost MUST be 0 when ChargeCategory is "Purchase," and the purchase is intended to cover related eligible *charges*.
```

* EffectiveCost MUST conform to [NumericFormat](#attributes.numericformat) requirements.
* EffectiveCost MUST NOT be null.
* EffectiveCost MUST be a valid decimal value.
* EffectiveCost MUST be denominated in the BillingCurrency.
* EffectiveCost MUST reflect all applicable pricing adjustments, including but not limited to *negotiated discounts*, *commitment discounts*, and other applicable discount programs.
* EffectiveCost MUST equal BilledCost when [ChargeCategory](#datasets.costandusage.chargecategory) is "Usage" and the *charge* is not covered by other eligible *charges*.
* EffectiveCost MUST equal BilledCost when ChargeCategory is "Purchase" and the *charge* is neither intended to cover other eligible *charges* nor covered by other eligible *charges*.
* EffectiveCost MUST equal BilledCost when ChargeCategory is "Tax" or "Credit".
* EffectiveCost MAY differ from BilledCost when ChargeCategory is "Adjustment".

> * EffectiveCost MUST include any portion of covering purchase *charges'* BilledCost applied to this *charge*.

Reviewer: slightly reworded alternative (avoiding possessive plural):

```suggestion
* EffectiveCost MUST include any portion of the BilledCost of covering purchase *charges* (ChargeCategory set to "Purchase") that is applied to this *charge*.
```

* EffectiveCost MUST be 0 when ChargeCategory is "Purchase" and the purchase is intended to cover related eligible *charges*.

> * The sum of the EffectiveCost of eligible *charges* covered by a purchase *charge* (ChargeCategory is "Purchase") MUST equal the sum of the BilledCost of the purchase and covered usage *charges* (ChargeCategory is "Usage"), over the *charge period* the purchase applies to, even in cases where the purchase and eligible usage *charges* have different cost origins (e.g., commitment discount, prepayment, marketplace purchase scenarios).

Author: Proposing a tighter version of this requirement using the new glossary terms (covered charge, covering charge) added in 03ea78d. The glossary definitions carry the ChargeCategory and cost-origin context, so the requirement itself can focus on the testable constraint.

```suggestion
* For a given [*covering charge*](#glossary:covering-charge), the sum of EffectiveCost across its [*covered charges*](#glossary:covered-charge) MUST equal the total BilledCost of the *covering charge* and its *covered charges*.
```

**Rationale:**

1. **Glossary terms absorb complexity.** The definitions of covered charge and covering charge already establish that covering charges are purchases (ChargeCategory = Purchase) and that the relationship spans commitment discounts, prepayments, and marketplace scenarios. No need to restate in the requirement.

2. **Charge-period scoping is implied.** A covering charge distributes its BilledCost over the charge period it applies to by definition. No other timeframe is meaningful.

3. **The cost-origins clause is unnecessary.** MUST is unconditional per RFC 2119. Listing scenarios where the rule still holds invites the question of unlisted scenarios. Marketplace and cross-origin examples belong in supporting content.

4. **67 to 27 words.** Shorter requirements are easier to implement, test, and maintain in the requirements model.

**What you lose:** explicit charge-period scoping and the defensive cost-origins note. Both are recoverable in supporting content if reviewers want them documented somewhere.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
* When a single cost and usage dataset provides both the [*covered*](#glossary:covered-charge) and [*covering charges*](#glossary:covering-charge), the sum of their EffectiveCost MUST equal the sum of their BilledCost over the *charge period* the *covering charge* applies to.
* When *covered* and *covering charges* originate from different cost and usage datasets, possibly from different ServiceProviderNames, the sum of their EffectiveCost MUST equal the sum of their BilledCost across the concatenated datasets over the *charge period* the *covering charge* applies to.
```

> * The sum of EffectiveCost in a given *billing period* MAY differ from the sum of the BilledCost for the same *billing period* for granularities like [*billing account*](#glossary:billing-account) and ServiceProviderName when the covered *charges* span more than one *billing period*, *billing account*, and in cases where the purchase records and usage records have different cost origins (e.g., commitment discount, prepayment, marketplace purchase scenarios).

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
* The sum of EffectiveCost for a given *billing period* MAY differ from the sum of BilledCost at granularities such as [*billing account*](#glossary:billing-account) and ServiceProviderName when *covered* and *covering charges* span multiple *billing periods*, *billing accounts*, or originate from different cost and usage datasets.
```

* EffectiveCost MUST conform to [NumericFormat](#attributes.numericformat) requirements.
* EffectiveCost MUST NOT be null.
* EffectiveCost MUST be a valid decimal value.
* EffectiveCost MUST be denominated in the BillingCurrency.
* EffectiveCost MUST reflect all applicable pricing adjustments, including but not limited to *negotiated discounts*, *commitment discounts*, and other applicable discount programs.
* EffectiveCost MUST equal BilledCost when [ChargeCategory](#datasets.costandusage.chargecategory) is "Usage" and the *charge* is not [*covered*](#glossary:covered-charge) by other eligible *charges*.

> * EffectiveCost MUST equal BilledCost when ChargeCategory is "Purchase" and the *charge* is neither intended to cover other eligible *charges* nor covered by other eligible *charges*.

Reviewer 2: Going on my comment above, where paid monthly commitments come in, this could null them out, a monthly commitment will have a usage row and purchase row in effective cost, where purchase row would represent the unused portion of the commitment that relates to the usage portion of the effectivecost. I have yet to figure out a better way to represent this but it does introduce ambiguity when you have "EffectiveCost MUST include any portion of the BilledCost of [*covering*](#glossary:covering-charge) purchase *charges* (ChargeCategory set to "Purchase") that is applied to this *charge*."

Author: Good question about monthly commitments. The model handles this:

- A monthly commitment purchase row IS a covering charge: ChargeCategory="Purchase", EffectiveCost=0 (per line 24).
- The amortized cost appears on Usage rows as EffectiveCost (per line 23: "MUST include any portion of the BilledCost of covering purchase charges").
- CommitmentDiscountStatus distinguishes "Used" (allocated to consumed resources) vs "Unused" (unallocated portion).

Even for monthly (no-upfront) commitments, the Purchase row represents the commitment obligation and the Usage rows carry the effective cost. The Purchase row's EffectiveCost is always 0 because its cost is fully redistributed.

If a provider has partial visibility (e.g., they can see the Purchase but not the Usage), the cross-dataset language on line 24 covers that scenario.

Happy to add a monthly commitment example to supporting content if that would help.

* EffectiveCost MUST equal BilledCost when ChargeCategory is "Tax" or "Credit".
* EffectiveCost MAY differ from BilledCost when ChargeCategory is "Adjustment".
* EffectiveCost MUST include any portion of the BilledCost of [*covering*](#glossary:covering-charge) purchase *charges* (ChargeCategory set to "Purchase") that is applied to this *charge*.

> * EffectiveCost MUST be 0 when ChargeCategory is "Purchase" and the purchase is intended to cover related eligible *charges*. This requirement applies even when the *covered charges* originate from different cost and usage datasets, possibly from a different [ServiceProviderName](#datasets.costandusage.serviceprovidername).

Reviewer 4: We should harmonize how ChargeCategory = "Purchase" is being phrased across these two lines.  Here is a lighter-weight suggestion, but one of the TF-3 authors might take it farther:

```suggestion
* EffectiveCost MUST include any portion of the BilledCost of [*covering*](#glossary:covering-charge) purchase *charges* (i.e., ChargeCategory is "Purchase") that is applied to this *charge*.
* EffectiveCost MUST be 0 when ChargeCategory is "Purchase" and the purchase is intended to cover related eligible *charges*. This requirement applies even when the *covered charges* originate from different cost and usage datasets, possibly from a different [ServiceProviderName](#datasets.costandusage.serviceprovidername).
```

Author: Current text on lines 23-24 already matches this suggestion. Resolving.

> * Entities that do not originate the cost and usage data for this *charge* MUST NOT generate *charges* with non-zero EffectiveCost to avoid double-counting when merging multiple datasets.

Reviewer: If TF-3 agrees with the suggestion in [this thread](https://github.com/FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS_Spec/pull/1966/files#r2965957896), I would propose to reformulate this requirement accordingly

Reviewer: @Matt-Cowsert @udam-stitcher @rileyjenk please check this out. thanks!

```suggestion
* EffectiveCost MUST be 0 for charges generated by entities that do not originate the cost and usage data, to avoid double-counting when merging multiple datasets.s.
```

Author: Used Shawn's version (same substance, minus the trailing typo). Thanks for the parallel suggestion, Irena.

> * Entities that do not originate the cost and usage data for this *charge* MUST NOT generate *charges* with non-zero EffectiveCost to avoid double-counting when merging multiple datasets.

Reviewer 4: @Matt-Cowsert 
Did she not do that here?
https://github.com/FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS_Spec/pull/1966/files#r2967018536

> * The sum of EffectiveCost across all related *covering* and *covered charges* MUST equal the sum of BilledCost across the same set of *charges*, within the *charge period* of the *covering charges*, when both the *covering* and *covered charges* are present in the dataset.

Reviewer 2: Do we need to include a tolerance level here as done in billed cost as it could be slightly out. @shawnalpay

Reviewer 4: @thecloudman 
We do not.  Effective Cost is inherently not an invoice construct, and we do not currently define any Effective Cost equivalent in Invoice Detail.  If and when we decide to do so, we could add such a tolerance requirement then.

No action here, IMO.

* EffectiveCost MUST conform to [NumericFormat](#attributes.numericformat) requirements.
* EffectiveCost MUST NOT be null.
* EffectiveCost MUST be a valid decimal value.
* EffectiveCost MUST be denominated in the BillingCurrency.
* EffectiveCost MUST reflect all applicable pricing adjustments, including but not limited to *negotiated discounts*, *commitment discounts*, and other applicable discount programs.
* EffectiveCost MUST equal BilledCost when [ChargeCategory](#datasets.costandusage.chargecategory) is "Usage" and the *charge* is not covered by other eligible *charges*.
* EffectiveCost MUST equal BilledCost when ChargeCategory is "Purchase" and the *charge* is neither intended to cover other eligible *charges* nor covered by other eligible *charges*.
* EffectiveCost MUST equal BilledCost when ChargeCategory is "Tax" or "Credit".
* EffectiveCost MAY differ from BilledCost when ChargeCategory is "Adjustment".
* EffectiveCost MUST include any portion of the BilledCost of covering purchase *charges* (ChargeCategory set to "Purchase") that is applied to this *charge*.

> * EffectiveCost MUST be 0 when ChargeCategory is "Purchase" and the purchase is intended to cover related eligible *charges*.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
* EffectiveCost MUST be 0 when ChargeCategory is "Purchase" and the purchase is intended to cover related eligible *charges*. This requirement applies even when the *covered charges* originate from different cost and usage dataset, possibly from a different ServiceProviderName.
```

Author: Accepted. This is useful implementation guidance even though the base requirement already applies unconditionally. Minor typo: "dataset" should be "datasets" — I will fix that when committing.

Author: Applied in d06008b. This was @udam-stitcher suggestion — I committed it via the API instead of using GitHub's suggestion acceptance, so the attribution didn't flow through properly. The Co-authored-by credit is in the commit message but the UI doesn't reflect it. Apologies for the process gap.

* When a single cost and usage dataset provides both the [*covered*](#glossary:covered-charge) and [*covering charges*](#glossary:covering-charge), the sum of their EffectiveCost MUST equal the sum of their BilledCost over the *charge period* the *covering charge* applies to.
* When *covered* and *covering charges* originate from different cost and usage datasets, possibly from different ServiceProviderNames, the sum of their EffectiveCost MUST equal the sum of their BilledCost across the concatenated datasets over the *charge period* the *covering charge* applies to.

> * The sum of EffectiveCost for a given *billing period* MAY differ from the sum of BilledCost at granularities such as [*billing account*](#glossary:billing-account) and ServiceProviderName when *covered* and *covering charges* span multiple *billing periods*, *billing accounts*, or originate from different cost and usage datasets.

Author: ## TF3 Action Item – 2026-03-06

The tracking spreadsheet has a to-do for a missing EffectiveCost requirement addressing third-party charges. BilledCost already has a requirement that entities not responsible for invoicing MUST NOT generate charges with BilledCost higher than zero. The corresponding EffectiveCost requirement is absent. Without it, CSPs could populate EffectiveCost on marketplace purchase records even when they lack the underlying usage records, which would produce inaccurate data. Matt volunteered to draft this requirement, using the BilledCost third-party requirement phrasing as a template. Irena and Udam committed to reviewing before the Monday maintainers meeting.

**Scope:**
- [x] Draft EffectiveCost normative requirement for third-party charges (CSPs MUST NOT provide EffectiveCost on charges where they are not the cost originator)
- [x] Align phrasing with existing BilledCost third-party requirement

**Assignee:** @matt-cowsert

Reviewer 6: I think this 
`* EffectiveCost MUST be 0 when ChargeCategory is "Purchase" and the purchase is intended to cover related eligible *charges*. `

covers the case of purchases that are intended to cover future charges btw. I've added something to that to see if it covers the concern raised here

Author: Closing this AI. The entity prohibition on line 25 ("EffectiveCost MUST be 0 for charges generated by entities that do not originate the cost and usage data") addresses the third-party EffectiveCost gap.

* EffectiveCost MUST conform to [NumericFormat](#attributes.numericformat) requirements.
* EffectiveCost MUST NOT be null.
* EffectiveCost MUST be a valid decimal value.
* EffectiveCost MUST be denominated in the BillingCurrency.
* EffectiveCost MUST reflect all applicable pricing adjustments, including but not limited to *negotiated discounts*, *commitment discounts*, and other applicable discount programs.
* EffectiveCost MUST equal BilledCost when [ChargeCategory](#datasets.costandusage.chargecategory) is "Usage" and the *charge* is not [*covered*](#glossary:covered-charge) by other eligible *charges*.
* EffectiveCost MUST equal BilledCost when ChargeCategory is "Purchase" and the *charge* is neither intended to cover other eligible *charges* nor covered by other eligible *charges*.
* EffectiveCost MUST equal BilledCost when ChargeCategory is "Tax" or "Credit".
* EffectiveCost MAY differ from BilledCost when ChargeCategory is "Adjustment".
* EffectiveCost MUST include any portion of the BilledCost of [*covering*](#glossary:covering-charge) purchase *charges* (ChargeCategory set to "Purchase") that is applied to this *charge*.

> * EffectiveCost MUST be 0 when ChargeCategory is "Purchase" and the purchase is intended to cover related eligible *charges*. This requirement applies even when the *covered charges* originate from different cost and usage datasets, possibly from a different [ServiceProviderName](#datasets.costandusage.serviceprovidername).

Author: Line 24 doesn't cover the case of a provider who doesn't have visibility of the usage-based charges, adding a 'Usage' (or some other ChargeCategory) charge for the amount of the covering purchase. Providers could do this as a one-time charge or use a linear approach to burn down the cost over the period, which doesn't align with actual usage-based charges.

When covered and covering charges originate from different cost and usage datasets, possibly from different ServiceProviderNames, the sum of their EffectiveCost MUST equal the sum of their BilledCost across the concatenated datasets over the charge period the covering charge applies to.

For context:
* Entities that are not responsible or authorized for invoicing this *charge* MUST NOT generate *charges* with non-zero BilledCost to avoid double-counting when merging multiple datasets.

Author: Closing this out. The cross-dataset language on line 24 ("This requirement applies even when the covered charges originate from different cost and usage datasets") addresses this scenario. Concrete examples will go in supporting content.

* Entities that do not originate the cost and usage data for this *charge* MUST NOT generate *charges* with non-zero EffectiveCost to avoid double-counting when merging multiple datasets.
* When a single cost and usage dataset provides both the [*covered*](#glossary:covered-charge) and [*covering charges*](#glossary:covering-charge), the sum of their EffectiveCost MUST equal the sum of their BilledCost over the *charge period* the *covering charge* applies to.
* When *covered* and *covering charges* originate from different cost and usage datasets, possibly from different ServiceProviderNames, the sum of their EffectiveCost MUST equal the sum of their BilledCost across the concatenated datasets over the *charge period* the *covering charge* applies to.

> * The sum of EffectiveCost for a given *billing period* MAY differ from the sum of BilledCost at granularities such as [*billing account*](#glossary:billing-account) and ServiceProviderName when *covered* and *covering charges* span multiple *billing periods*, *billing accounts*, or originate from different cost and usage datasets.

Reviewer: I would go with these 4 requirements for EffectiveCost:

* EffectiveCost MUST be 0 when ChargeCategory is "Purchase" and the purchase is intended to cover related eligible charges (i.e., a covering charge).
* The sum of EffectiveCost across all related covering and covered charges MUST equal the sum of BilledCost across the same set of charges, within the charge period of the covering charges, when both the covering and covered charges originate from the same entity.
* The sum of EffectiveCost across all related covering and covered charges MUST equal the sum of BilledCost across the same set of charges, within the charge period of the covering charges, when the covering and covered charges originate from different entities but both are present in the dataset.
* The sum of EffectiveCost across all related covering and covered charges MAY differ from the sum of BilledCost across the same set of charges when the covering and covered charges originate from different entities and the dataset contains charges from only one of those entities.

instead of these

* Entities that do not originate the cost and usage data for this *charge* MUST NOT generate *charges* with non-zero EffectiveCost to avoid double-counting when merging multiple datasets.
* When a single cost and usage dataset provides both the [*covered*](#glossary:covered-charge) and [*covering charges*](#glossary:covering-charge), the sum of their EffectiveCost MUST equal the sum of their BilledCost over the *charge period* the *covering charge* applies to.
* When *covered* and *covering charges* originate from different cost and usage datasets, possibly from different ServiceProviderNames, the sum of their EffectiveCost MUST equal the sum of their BilledCost across the concatenated datasets over the *charge period* the *covering charge* applies to.
* The sum of EffectiveCost for a given *billing period* MAY differ from the sum of BilledCost at granularities such as [*billing account*](#glossary:billing-account) and ServiceProviderName when *covered* and *covering charges* span multiple *billing periods*, *billing accounts*, or originate from different cost and usage datasets.

We could also add the following, but I think it is redundant:

* EffectiveCost of a covering charge MUST NOT be non-zero to compensate for the EffectiveCost of covered charges when the covering and covered charges originate from different entities and the dataset contains charges from only one of those entities.

Once we add a column representing the origin and enable association of covering and covered charges, we can revisit and tighten these requirements.

Author: @ijurica, I'm largely aligned. Here’s where I land on each of your four proposed requirements.

**"EffectiveCost MUST be 0 when ChargeCategory is 'Purchase' and the purchase is intended to cover related eligible charges (i.e., a covering charge)."**

This is already on line 24 with @udam-stitcher’s cross-dataset sentence committed in d06008b. I’d keep line 24 as-is rather than simplifying it. The cross-dataset clarification is useful implementation guidance even though the base obligation is unconditional. No change needed here.

**"The sum of EffectiveCost across all related covering and covered charges MUST equal the sum of BilledCost across the same set of charges, within the charge period of the covering charges, when both the covering and covered charges originate from the same entity."**

Accepted. Replacing "single cost and usage dataset" with "same entity" is more precise, since a single dataset can contain charges from multiple entities.

**"The sum of EffectiveCost across all related covering and covered charges MUST equal the sum of BilledCost across the same set of charges, within the charge period of the covering charges, when the covering and covered charges originate from different entities but both are present in the dataset."**

Accepted. "Both are present in the dataset" scopes the MUST to what a validator can observe, which was your core concern. This replaces the "concatenated datasets" language that implied cross-dataset validation.

**"The sum of EffectiveCost across all related covering and covered charges MAY differ from the sum of BilledCost across the same set of charges when the covering and covered charges originate from different entities and the dataset contains charges from only one of those entities."**

Accepted. One question: the current MAY (line 28) also acknowledges that EffectiveCost sums may differ at billing-period granularity even for same-entity charges (e.g., annual RI amortized monthly means EffectiveCost ≠ BilledCost within any single month). I believe "within the charge period of the covering charges" in your two MUST requirements handles this implicitly. Can you confirm?

**Dropping the entity prohibition (line 25):** Agreed. The per-ChargeCategory baselines on lines 19-22 already constrain EffectiveCost for Usage, Purchase, Tax, Credit, and Adjustment. The remaining gap — a non-originating entity declaring a covering relationship — is unenforceable without a column that distinguishes the entity that generated the underlying data from entities that process or re-deliver it. Whether that’s a DataOriginator column, a DataProcessor column, or something else is a design decision worth its own FR. For now, dropping the prohibition and revisiting once that column exists is the right call.

**"EffectiveCost of a covering charge MUST NOT be non-zero...":** Agreed this is redundant. Line 24 already sets the obligation unconditionally.

I’ve posted a suggestion on lines 25-28 with the formatted replacement text. If we’re aligned on the billing-period question, I’ll commit and we’re ready for member review Thursday.

Reviewer 6: > "The sum of EffectiveCost across all related covering and covered charges MUST equal the sum of BilledCost across the same set of charges, within the charge period of the covering charges, when both the covering and covered charges originate from the same entity."

Fine with this.

> "The sum of EffectiveCost across all related covering and covered charges MUST equal the sum of BilledCost across the same set of charges, within the charge period of the covering charges, when the covering and covered charges originate from different entities but both are present in the dataset."

Fine with this.

> "The sum of EffectiveCost across all related covering and covered charges MAY differ from the sum of BilledCost across the same set of charges when the covering and covered charges originate from different entities and the dataset contains charges from only one of those entities."

This is too broad. We meant to say it MAY vary within a single billing period for various reasons, since a covering charge can apply to covered charges across multiple billing accounts or span multiple billing periods.

> Dropping the entity prohibition (line 25): Agreed. The per-ChargeCategory baselines on lines 19-22 already constrain EffectiveCost for Usage, Purchase, Tax, Credit, and Adjustment. The remaining gap — a non-originating entity declaring a covering relationship — is unenforceable without a column that distinguishes the entity that generated the underlying data from entities that process or re-deliver it. Whether that’s a DataOriginator column, a DataProcessor column, or something else is a design decision worth its own FR. For now, dropping the prohibition and revisiting once that column exists is the right call.

> "EffectiveCost of a covering charge MUST NOT be non-zero...": Agreed this is redundant. Line 24 already sets the obligation unconditionally.

Line 24 doesn't cover the case of a provider who doesn't have visibility of the usage-based charges, adding a 'Usage' (or some other ChargeCategory) charge for the amount of the covering purchase. Providers could do this as a one-time charge or use a linear approach to burn down the cost over the period, which doesn't align with actual usage-based charges.

> * The sum of EffectiveCost for a given *billing period* MAY differ from the sum of BilledCost at granularities such as [*billing account*](#glossary:billing-account) and ServiceProviderName when *covered* and *covering charges* span multiple *billing periods*, *billing accounts*, or originate from different cost and usage datasets.

Author: Accepting Irena's proposed sum-check replacements with glossary term formatting applied. This drops the entity prohibition (line 25), replaces the "concatenated datasets" language with "both are present in the dataset," and narrows the MAY to the single-entity-only condition. See reply to Irena's comment for full rationale.

```suggestion
* The sum of EffectiveCost across all related [*covering*](#glossary:covering-charge) and [*covered charges*](#glossary:covered-charge) MUST equal the sum of BilledCost across the same set of *charges*, within the *charge period* of the *covering charges*, when both the *covering* and *covered charges* originate from the same entity.
* The sum of EffectiveCost across all related *covering* and *covered charges* MUST equal the sum of BilledCost across the same set of *charges*, within the *charge period* of the *covering charges*, when the *covering* and *covered charges* originate from different entities but both are present in the dataset.
* The sum of EffectiveCost across all related *covering* and *covered charges* MAY differ from the sum of BilledCost across the same set of *charges* when the *covering* and *covered charges* originate from different entities and the dataset contains *charges* from only one of those entities.
```

Author: we aligned in TF-3, during the 2026-03-13 meeting, that we do not want to drop the entity prohibition, so not accepting this adjustment.

* EffectiveCost MUST conform to [NumericFormat](#attributes.numericformat) requirements.
* EffectiveCost MUST NOT be null.
* EffectiveCost MUST be a valid decimal value.
* EffectiveCost MUST be denominated in the BillingCurrency.
* EffectiveCost MUST reflect all applicable pricing adjustments, including but not limited to *negotiated discounts*, *commitment discounts*, and other applicable discount programs.

> * EffectiveCost MUST match the BilledCost in scenarios where this *charge* is not covering other eligible *charges* or is not covered by other eligible *charges*.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* EffectiveCost MUST equal BilledCost when ChargeCategory is not "Adjustment" and the *charge* is neither intended to cover other eligible *charges* nor covered by other eligible *charges*.
```

Reviewer: Per our discussion during the TF-3 meeting, I am committing this as the latest candidate.  
For reference, all options considered during the discussions are outlined in the `supporting_content/datasets/cost_and_usage/columns/billed-and-effective-cost.md` file.

> * EffectiveCost MUST equal BilledCost when ChargeCategory is not "Adjustment" and the *charge* is neither intended to cover other eligible *charges* nor covered by other eligible *charges*.

Reviewer: a more precise alternative:

```suggestion
* EffectiveCost MUST equal BilledCost when ChargeCategory is "Usage" and the *charge* is not covered by other eligible *charges*.
* EffectiveCost MUST equal BilledCost when ChargeCategory is "Purchase" and the *charge* is neither intended to cover other eligible *charges* nor covered by other eligible *charges*.
* EffectiveCost MUST equal BilledCost when ChargeCategory is "Tax" or "Credit".
* EffectiveCost MAY differ from BilledCost when ChargeCategory is "Adjustment".
```

Reviewer 2: I think your more precise alternative is a better option than all previous views.

Author: Accepted in 01d5c09. Thanks Irena.

* The sum of EffectiveCost in a given *billing period* MAY differ from the sum of the BilledCost for the same *billing period* for granularities like [*billing account*](#glossary:billing-account) and ServiceProviderName when the covered *charges* span more than one *billing period*, *billing account*, and in cases where the purchase records and usage records have different cost origins (e.g., commitment discount, prepayment, marketplace purchase scenarios).
* The sum of EffectiveCost where ChargeCategory is "Usage" for a given [CommitmentDiscountId](#datasets.costandusage.commitmentdiscountid) MUST equal the sum of BilledCost where ChargeCategory is "Purchase" for the same CommitmentDiscountId.
* EffectiveCost MUST represent the portion of the amortized *commitment discount* allocated to eligible *resources* or *services* consumed during the *charge period* when CommitmentDiscountStatus is "Used".

> * EffectiveCost MUST represent the portion of the amortized *commitment discount* that was not allocated to any *resources* or *services* during the *charge period* when CommitmentDiscountStatus is "Unused".

Reviewer: Removing commitment discount specific requirements

```suggestion
```

* EffectiveCost MUST conform to [NumericFormat](#attributes.numericformat) requirements.
* EffectiveCost MUST NOT be null.
* EffectiveCost MUST be a valid decimal value.
* EffectiveCost MUST be denominated in the BillingCurrency.
* EffectiveCost MUST be based on actual usage data, service consumption data, or contract commitment recognition data.

> * EffectiveCost MUST NOT be populated with estimated, interpolated, or inferred values.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
```

> * EffectiveCost MUST match the BilledCost in scenarios where this *charge* is not covering other eligible *charges* or is not covered by other eligible *charges*.

Author: Per TF-3 discussion on 2026-02-13, we want to have a carve out for adjustments

```suggestion
* EffectiveCost MUST match the BilledCost in scenarios where this *charge* is not covering other eligible *charges* or is not covered by other eligible *charges* and ChargeCategory is "Adjustment".
```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* EffectiveCost MUST equal BilledCost when ChargeCategory is not "Adjustment" and the *charge* is neither intended to cover other eligible *charges* nor covered by other eligible *charges*.
```

Reviewer: I'm sure you'll find this confusing, but hopefully it will make sense tomorrow when I explain what I meant.
Check out the supporting content if you want to get confused even more. 😅

---

#### Independent Usage and Purchase Charges (Effective - Billed comparison)

* ~~**NOK:** EffectiveCost MUST match the BilledCost in scenarios where this *charge* is not covering other eligible *charges* or is not covered by other eligible *charges*.~~
* ~~**NOK:** EffectiveCost MUST match the BilledCost in scenarios where this *charge* is not covering other eligible *charges* or is not covered by other eligible *charges* and ChargeCategory is "Adjustment".~~
* ~~**NOK:** BilledCost MUST be 0 when InvoiceIssuerName does not match the DataOriginatorName.~~
* ~~**NOK:** EffectiveCost MUST equal BilledCost when ChargeCategory is not "Adjustment" and the *charge* is neither intended to cover other eligible *charges* nor covered by other eligible *charges*.~~
* **NOK:** EffectiveCost MUST equal BilledCost when ChargeCategory is "Usage" and the *charge* is not covered by other eligible *charges*.
* **NOK:** EffectiveCost MUST equal BilledCost when ChargeCategory is "Purchase" and the *charge* is neither intended to cover other eligible *charges* nor covered by other eligible *charges*.

#### Covering/Covered Charges

* **NOK:** EffectiveCost MUST be 0 when ChargeCategory is "Purchase" and the purchase is intended to cover related eligible *charges*.

#### Credits

* **NOK:** EffectiveCost MUST be 0 when ChargeCategory is "Credit".

#### Derived Charges

* ~~**NOK:** EffectiveCost MUST be derived from the EffectiveCost of underlying *charges* when ChargeCategory is "Tax" or "Adjustment".~~

Reviewer: resolving in favor of [this](https://github.com/FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS_Spec/pull/1966/files#r2840156545)

* EffectiveCost MUST be 0 when [ChargeCategory](#datasets.costandusage.chargecategory) is "Purchase" and the purchase is intended to cover related eligible *charges*.

> * EffectiveCost MUST be derived from the EffectiveCost of underlying *charges* when ChargeCategory is "Tax" or "Adjustment".

Author: Per TF-3 discussion on 2026-02-13, we agreed to strike this requirement
```suggestion
```

> * EffectiveCost MUST be derived from the EffectiveCost of underlying *charges* when ChargeCategory is "Tax" or "Adjustment".

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
```

Reviewer: resolving as duplicate of [this ](https://github.com/FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS_Spec/pull/1966/files#r2805201987)

* The sum of EffectiveCost MUST equal the sum of BilledCost within [*dataset artifacts*](#glossary:dataset-artifact) from a single data generator when those *dataset artifacts* include both purchase *charges* (ChargeCategory is "Purchase") and the related eligible *charges* they are intended to cover from the same source, or when the artifact contains neither purchase nor covered charges.

> * The sum of EffectiveCost MAY differ from the sum of BilledCost within [*dataset artifacts*](#glossary:dataset-artifact) from a single data generator when the artifact contains only purchase *charges* (ChargeCategory is "Purchase") or only the related eligible *charges* they are intended to cover, and those *charges* originate from different data sources (e.g., marketplace scenarios).

Reviewer 6: Seems like we dont need these

Reviewer: Discussed at ad-hoc meeting on Feb 26. Removing lines 24 and 25

> * The sum of EffectiveCost in a given *billing period* MAY differ from the sum of the payable amounts provided in the invoices received for the same *billing period* for a [*billing account*](#glossary:billing-account).

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
* The sum of the EffectiveCost of eligible *charges* covered by a purchase *charge* (ChargeCategory is "Purchase") MUST equal the sum of the BilledCost of the purchase and covered usage *charges* (ChargeCategory is "Usage"), over the *charge period* the purchase applies to, even in cases where the purchase and eligible usage *charges* have different cost origins (e.g., commitment discount, prepayment, marketplace purchase scenarios).
* The sum of EffectiveCost in a given *billing period* MAY differ from the sum of the BilledCost for the same *billing period* for granularities like [*billing account*](#glossary:billing-account) and ServiceProviderName when the covered *charges* span more than one *billing period*, *billing account*, and in cases where the purchase records and usage records have different cost origins (e.g., commitment discount, prepayment, marketplace purchase scenarios).
```

* *Charges* for a given [CommitmentDiscountId](#datasets.costandusage.commitmentdiscountid) adhere to the following additional requirements:
  * The sum of EffectiveCost where ChargeCategory is "Usage" MUST equal the sum of BilledCost where ChargeCategory is "Purchase".
  * The sum of EffectiveCost where ChargeCategory is "Usage" MUST equal the sum of EffectiveCost where ChargeCategory is "Usage" and [CommitmentDiscountStatus](#datasets.costandusage.commitmentdiscountstatus) is "Used", plus the sum of EffectiveCost where ChargeCategory is "Usage" and CommitmentDiscountStatus is "Unused".
  * When CommitmentDiscountStatus is "Used", EffectiveCost MUST represent the portion of the amortized *commitment discount* allocated to eligible *resources* or *services* consumed during the *charge period*.

>   * When CommitmentDiscountStatus is "Unused", EffectiveCost MUST represent the portion of the amortized *commitment discount* that was not allocated to any *resources* or *services* during the *charge period*.

Reviewer: We still need to account for this beyond commitment discounts. I don’t have a suggestion yet - just pointing it out 😞

>   * When CommitmentDiscountStatus is "Unused", EffectiveCost MUST represent the portion of the amortized *commitment discount* that was not allocated to any *resources* or *services* during the *charge period*.

Reviewer 6: feels like we can get rid of these and move them to examples of usage and purchases charges that have different cost origins (e.g., commitment discount, prepayment, marketplace purchase scenarios)

Reviewer: But, I'd keep the DiscountHandling, at least for now.
(To be discussed with RM team as well)

Reviewer: Addressed. Resolving

>   * When CommitmentDiscountStatus is "Unused", EffectiveCost MUST represent the portion of the amortized *commitment discount* that was not allocated to any *resources* or *services* during the *charge period*.

Reviewer: As previously mentioned, I agree with Udam's [suggestion](https://github.com/FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS_Spec/pull/1966/files#r2804222854) - we should remove this block of CommitmentDiscount-specific requirements. 

However, I suggest we keep the DiscountHandling attribute, at least for now (we need to revisit it, but that’s out of scope for this PR, right?). - *to be discussed with the RM team as well*

If we decide to keep them, I suggest replacing them with something like the following:

```suggestion
* The sum of EffectiveCost where ChargeCategory is "Usage" for a given [CommitmentDiscountId](#datasets.costandusage.commitmentdiscountid) MUST equal the sum of BilledCost where ChargeCategory is "Purchase" for the same CommitmentDiscountId.
* EffectiveCost MUST represent the portion of the amortized *commitment discount* allocated to eligible *resources* or *services* consumed during the *charge period* when CommitmentDiscountStatus is "Used".
* EffectiveCost MUST represent the portion of the amortized *commitment discount* that was not allocated to any *resources* or *services* during the *charge period* when CommitmentDiscountStatus is "Unused".
```

  * EffectiveCost of a *charge* calculated based on other *charges* (e.g., when the ChargeCategory is "Tax") MUST be calculated based on the EffectiveCost of those related *charges*.
  * EffectiveCost of a *charge* unrelated to other *charges* (e.g., when the ChargeCategory is "Credit") MUST match the [BilledCost](#datasets.costandusage.billedcost).
* *Charges* for a given [CommitmentDiscountId](#datasets.costandusage.commitmentdiscountid) adhere to the following additional requirements:
  * The sum of EffectiveCost where ChargeCategory is "Usage" MUST equal the sum of BilledCost where ChargeCategory is "Purchase".
  * The sum of EffectiveCost where ChargeCategory is "Usage" MUST equal the sum of EffectiveCost where ChargeCategory is "Usage" and [CommitmentDiscountStatus](#datasets.costandusage.commitmentdiscountstatus) is "Used", plus the sum of EffectiveCost where ChargeCategory is "Usage" and CommitmentDiscountStatus is "Unused".
  * When CommitmentDiscountStatus is "Used", EffectiveCost MUST represent the portion of the amortized *commitment discount* allocated to eligible *resources* or *services* consumed during the *charge period*.

>   * When CommitmentDiscountStatus is "Unused", EffectiveCost MUST represent the portion of the amortized *commitment discount* that was not allocated to any *resources* or *services* during the *charge period*.

Reviewer: suggesting editorial adjustments:

* Pattern:

``` markdown
* <ColumnId> MUST/MUST NOT/SHOULD/MUST be null when <Condition>.
```

* To simplify the requirements, relying on CommitmentDiscountStatus is sufficient.

> * CommitmentDiscountStatus MUST NOT be null when CommitmentDiscountId is not null and [Charge Category](https://github.com/FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS_Spec/blob/working_draft/specification/datasets/cost_and_usage/columns/commitmentdiscountstatus.md#datasets.costandusage.chargecategory) is "Usage".

---

```suggestion
* EffectiveCost MUST represent the portion of the amortized *commitment discount* allocated to eligible *resources* or *services* consumed during the *charge period* when CommitmentDiscountStatus is "Used".
* EffectiveCost MUST represent the portion of the amortized *commitment discount* that was not allocated to any *resources* or *services* during the *charge period* when CommitmentDiscountStatus is "Unused".
```

Reviewer: resolving in favor of [this thread](https://github.com/FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS_Spec/pull/1966/files#r2833816104)

* EffectiveCost MUST conform to [NumericFormat](#attributes.numericformat) requirements.
* EffectiveCost MUST NOT be null.
* EffectiveCost MUST be a valid decimal value.
* EffectiveCost MUST be denominated in the BillingCurrency.
* EffectiveCost MUST be based on actual usage data, service consumption data, or contract commitment recognition data.
* EffectiveCost MUST NOT be populated with estimated, interpolated, or inferred values.
* EffectiveCost MUST reflect all applicable pricing adjustments, including but not limited to *negotiated discounts*, *commitment discounts*, and other applicable discount programs.

> * EffectiveCost MUST equal BilledCost when the *charge* is unrelated to other *charges*.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
* EffectiveCost MUST equal the BilledCost in scenarios where this *charge* is not covering other eligible *charges* or is not covered by other eligible *charges*.
```

* EffectiveCost MAY differ from BilledCost when ChargeCategory is "Adjustment".
* EffectiveCost MUST be 0 when [ChargeCategory](#datasets.costandusage.chargecategory) is "Purchase" and the purchase is intended to cover related eligible *charges*.
* The sum of EffectiveCost MUST equal the sum of BilledCost within [*dataset artifacts*](#glossary:dataset-artifact) from a single data generator when those *dataset artifacts* include both purchase *charges* (ChargeCategory is "Purchase") and the related eligible *charges* they are intended to cover from the same source, or when the artifact contains neither purchase nor covered charges.

> * The sum of EffectiveCost MAY differ from the sum of BilledCost within [*dataset artifacts*](#glossary:dataset-artifact) from a single data generator when the artifact contains only purchase *charges* (ChargeCategory is "Purchase") or only the related eligible *charges* they are intended to cover, and those *charges* originate from different data sources (e.g., marketplace scenarios).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

* EffectiveCost MAY differ from BilledCost when ChargeCategory is "Adjustment".
* EffectiveCost MUST include any portion of the BilledCost of [*covering*](#glossary:covering-charge) purchase *charges* (ChargeCategory set to "Purchase") that is applied to this *charge*.
* EffectiveCost MUST be 0 when ChargeCategory is "Purchase" and the purchase is intended to cover related eligible *charges*. This requirement applies even when the *covered charges* originate from different cost and usage datasets, possibly from a different [ServiceProviderName](#datasets.costandusage.serviceprovidername).

> * EffectiveCost MUST be 0 for charges generated by entities that do not originate the cost and usage data, to avoid double-counting when merging multiple datasets.s.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* EffectiveCost MUST be 0 for charges generated by entities that do not originate the cost and usage data, to avoid double-counting when merging multiple datasets.
```

Author: Incorporated. Thanks, Shawn.
